README.adoc, before:

= Training Modules for Software Engineers.

:imagesdir: ./images

:fn-time-commitment: footnote:time-commitment[Varies based on my availability.]

:fn-language-specific-pitfall: footnote:language-specific-pitfall[Evergreen skills should be the focus of engineers looking to upskill. Language/tooling specific skills are included as, unfortunately, many interviewers focus on them during technical conversations.]

This repository is a commitment from me to a group of Software Engineers at the company I work for; to run weekly{fn-time-commitment} training sessions with an end goal of growing their careers.

This results in the outlined pathway being curated specifically to those Engineers and their career desires. This is open-sourced with the hopes it may provide useful to other engineers.

The modules will be iteratively added as the sessions commence over time.

Admittedly, the initial modules will focus on Technical Foundational skills through language specific verbatim, which is an acceptable pitfall{fn-language-specific-pitfall} considering the Engineers these modules were originally delivered to wish to learn TypeScript. Future sessions will progress to broader subjects such as best practices, leadership, collaboration and thinking critically about solutioning valuable business problems.

*This is a work in progress. Information will be missing.*

====
Each week{fn-time-commitment} a new module will be added for the next subject in the pathway. *The pathway is only a rough estimate and may change.*

Each module will have some form of interactive element for the audience, however expect the structure of modules to change.

A prerequisite for each module is to install `node` and `npm`.
====

NOTE: The latter stages are yet to be planned out.

image::high-level-pathway.png[]

Chronological List of available modules:

* link:./modules/TechnicalFoundations/MathematicalApproachesToSoftware/README.adoc[Week 1 Mathematical Approaches to Software]

Commit message:

chore: Introduce control structure module (#6)

README.adoc, after:

= Training Modules for Software Engineers.

:imagesdir: ./images

:fn-time-commitment: footnote:time-commitment[Varies based on my availability.]

:fn-language-specific-pitfall: footnote:language-specific-pitfall[Evergreen skills should be the focus of engineers looking to upskill. Language/tooling specific skills are included as, unfortunately, many interviewers focus on them during technical conversations.]

:fn-capstone-project: footnote:capstone-project[A capstone project allows you to demonstrate your accumulated knowledge and skills by tackling a real-world problem. As you continue to progress throughout the training modules you will constantly be applying your learnings to a practical endeavour.]

This repository is a commitment from me to a group of Software Engineers at the company I work for; to run weekly{fn-time-commitment} training sessions with an end goal of growing their careers.

This results in the outlined pathway being curated specifically to those Engineers and their career desires. This is open-sourced with the hopes it may provide useful to other engineers.

The modules will be iteratively added as the sessions commence over time.

Admittedly, the initial modules will focus on Technical Foundational skills through language specific verbatim, which is an acceptable pitfall{fn-language-specific-pitfall} considering the Engineers these modules were originally delivered to wish to learn TypeScript. Future sessions will progress to broader subjects such as best practices, leadership, collaboration and thinking critically about solutioning valuable business problems.

*This is a work in progress. Information will be missing.*

====
Each week{fn-time-commitment} a new module will be added for the next subject in the pathway. *The pathway is only a rough estimate and may change.*

Each module will have some form of interactive element for the audience, however expect the structure of modules to change.

After the first session, each module will have an accompanying 🧱 *capstone project{fn-capstone-project}* section which is optional for those reading along at home. These additions were useful for the engineers partaking in the weekly sessions as it enabled applied learning.

A prerequisite for each module is to install `node` and `npm`.
====

NOTE: The latter stages are yet to be planned out. Links to modules are found beneath the pathway chart.

image::high-level-pathway.png[]

Chronological List of available modules:

* link:./modules/TechnicalFoundations/MathematicalApproachesToSoftware/README.adoc[Session 1: Mathematical Approaches to Software]
* link:./modules/TechnicalFoundations/ControlStructures/README.adoc[Session 2: Control Structures]
